```cs
using System;
                    
public class Foo
{
    public override string ToString() { return "0"; }
    public static implicit operator string(Foo f) { return "1"; }
}

public class Program
{
    public static void Main()
    {
        Foo f = new Foo();
        Console.Write(f);
        Console.Write($"{f}");
        Console.Write(f + "");
        Console.Write((object)f);
    }
}
```

Answer: 1010

SharpLab: https://sharplab.io/#v2:C4LgTgrgdgNAJiA1AHwAICYCMBYAUAAkKOJJL1QGZ8N8AxAe3rwG89jL96A3AUzDACWcHtUwAGfABV6AZWCCoAcwAUASnzNqAdnwAiMboDc+AL5siHVJgBs+AQFsADgBsBAYwHBOjvgENg9GCiYsoM9PgAZuqaqDq6mEameGa45FQ0Vlos5oQY6DkaBcRhkfgAvPhQPADudIxqhkVEAML0UADO9M48AHQA6oLAPMpRjQSk+K0dXb0DnsMAJLrMESa6qmMTk22d3f2DwxH4iHrrmxNTu7MHysr0AEYAVjxuwKqjBSkmQA

Hint:
In .NET, all objects have a <code>ToString()</code> method. String interpolation works with any type.

Explanation:
The class <code>Foo</code> defines 2 members - a <code>ToString()</code> method and an implicit conversion to string. The question is about which of the these is preferred in different cases.

In the first case, the implicit conversion is preferred because <code>Console.Write()</code> has an overload that takes a string. There also happens to be an overload taking <code>object</code>, but when resolving function overloads, the overload with the most specific types (string) is chosen.

In the second case, we are using string interpolation. String interpolation works with any object, and has a few rules for how the conversion is done. If we pass a custom formatter, that is used. Next, if the type implements <code>IFormattable</code>, that is used. Finally, we fall back to the <code>ToString()</code> method, which is guaranteed to exist for any object.

In the third case, the implicit conversion is used again. There is no addition operator between <code>Foo</code> and string, so the only thing the language can do to resolve this is cast one side to string.

In the final case, we explicitly cast to object. Now the operand exactly matches the overload of <code>Console.Write()</code> that takes an <code>object</code>. The only way to convert any <code>object</code> to a string is via its <code>ToString()</code> method.