```cs
using System;
using System.Collections;

public class Foo : IEnumerable
{
    IEnumerator IEnumerable.GetEnumerator()
    {
        return new int[] { 0 }.GetEnumerator();
    }

    public IEnumerator GetEnumerator()
    {
        return new int[] { 1 }.GetEnumerator();
    }
}

public class Program
{	
    public static void Main()
    {
        foreach (var f in new Foo())
            Console.Write(f);
        
        foreach (var f in (IEnumerable)new Foo())
            Console.Write(f);
    }
}
```

Answer: 10

SharpLab: https://sharplab.io/#v2:C4LgTgrgdgNAJiA1AHwAICYCMBYAUKgBgAJVMA6AYQHsAbGgUwGNgBLKqAZwG489UBmEuiIAxKlSIgSmfngDeeIkqIBJAKJQIAW3pgAhsCphp/MgHF6wDdt0GjACgCUi5QtzKPJAOxEo9AO5ELFDAANoAukRyRMQAvuaW1jr6hmBOPO7KsbyZSgKqSbapRBZWmsl2ac65US6e3r4BQSERUUSYRPGlhSkOjhke2bhDfIIY0l7yAJB1QuizbvVKAGZG9HqMABZE9gBuesbLzY2BYlRO1Uue1Jy09GQA6mAswPT2y/2zHl/Kq2DrWx2+0Ox3spH4jj8p3EFx+9RuHDuj2er3enxqQ1iQA==

Hint:
In C#, the <code>foreach</code> construct is duck-typed, and doesn't care about which interfaces the operand implements.

Explanation:
The class <code>Foo</code> implements the interface <code>IEnumerable</code> with 2 methods - 1 implicit implementation and 1 explicit implementation. The reason these 2 mechanisms of implementing interfaces exist, is to handle cases where multiple interfaces define the same members. You can either have 1 implicit implementation binding to multiple interfaces, or several explicit implementations binding to each their interface. In this case, we only have 1 interface, but C# still allows us to implement it with both mechanisms. The implementations will just overlap.

The next important piece of information is that <code>foreach</code> uses <a href="https://im5tu.io/article/2022/01/things-you-might-not-know-about-csharp-duck-typing/">duck typing</a>. In other words, the <code>foreach</code> construct doesn't care that our type implements <code>IEnumerable</code>, it's completely irrelevant. All it requires is a method called <code>GetEnumerator</code> which returns an <code>IEnumerator</code>.

The question thus boils down to this: Which of 2 the implementations is preferred in these 2 cases:
<pre><code>
(new Foo()).GetEnumerator()
((IEnumerable)new Foo()).GetEnumerator()
</code></pre>
In the first case, we choose the implicit implementation as it is considered more specific (or "closer" <a href="https://ericlippert.com/2013/12/23/closer-is-better/">in the words of Eric Lippert</a>) - we are talking about the concrete <code>Foo</code> type after all. 

In the second case, there is only 1 possible choice, as neither of the implementations are virtual. We've thrown away the type of <code>Foo</code> for the purposes of compile time analysis, and only have an <code>IEnumerable</code>. The call is thus resolved to the explicit implementation at compile time.
